Source : SADC — « Free Trade Area », page « Integration Milestones »
URL    : https://www.sadc.int/integration-milestones/free-trade-area
Relevé : 2026-09-18

--- extrait verbatim ---

The SADC Free Trade Area was achieved in August 2008, when a phased programme
of tariff reductions that had commenced in 2001 resulted in the attainment of
minimum conditions for the Free Trade Area - 85% of intra-regional trade
amongst the partner states attained zero duty. While the minimum conditions
were met, maximum tariff liberalisation was only attained by January 2012,
when the tariff phase down process for sensitive products was completed. For
countries falling under the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), this
process was completed in January 2007. For Mozambique, the process will only
be completed in 2015 in respect of imports from South Africa. Thirteen out of
fifteen SADC Member States are part of the Free Trade Area, while Angola and
Democratic Republic of Congo remain outside. Malawi fell behind with the
implementation of its tariff phase-down schedules since 2004. In December
2010, Malawi undertook a tariff reform exercise to align its tariff schedule
to the COMESA and SADC tariff regimes. Since this intervention, the SADC
Secretariat is assessing Malawi's tariff schedule to determine the level of
compliance with its commitments under the SADC Trade Protocol. Zimbabwe
experienced problems in implementing its tariff commitments on sensitive
products and was allowed to suspend tariff phase-downs from 2010 until 2012.

--- fin de l'extrait ---

RÉSERVE DE DATATION — la page ne porte aucune date de publication ni de mise à
jour. Son texte parle de 2015 au FUTUR (« the process will only be completed
in 2015 »), ce qui la situe avant 2015. Elle annonce en outre « fifteen »
États membres, quand la SADC en compte seize depuis l'adhésion des Comores.
L'exclusion de l'Angola et de la RD Congo peut donc avoir changé depuis, et le
statut des Comores n'est pas tranché par ce texte.
