Somalie — Somali Customs Tariff 2020, règles générales (sections B et C)
Source : https://mof.gov.so/sites/default/files/2020-12/_Somali_Customs_Tariff_2020_Tariff_Schedule.pdf
Ministère des Finances, République fédérale de Somalie. Pages 9 et 10 du PDF
(pagination imprimée en haut de page), sections B. « General rules concerning
duties » et C. « General rules applicable both to nomenclature and to duties ».
Extrait automatique du PDF officiel, non retouché.

B. General rules concerning duties
1. The customs duties applicable to imported goods originating in other countries, with which the Federal
Republic of Somalia has not concluded any preferential agreement, are given in column 4 of the schedule
of duties.
2. The customs duties applicable to goods being exported from Somalia will be at the rate of 2%.
3. The duties expressed as percentage rates are ad valorem duties and are calculated as a percentage of
Customs value of goods. Customs value will be based on the transaction value.
4. The duties expressed as absolute number rates along with a unit of measure of quantity are specific duties.
5. The rates of duty reproduced in column 4 are applicable from 1 January 2022
6. With respect to goods originating in certain countries with which the Federal Republic of Somalia has
concluded preferential agreements, a reduction of the rates mentioned in paragraphs 1 maybe applied.
7. The symbols in the column 5 indicates various measures that may be applicable in the trade of certain,
meaning as the following
(a) The symbol "PRB" indicates that the related goods are prohibited to be imported in, or exported from
Somalia, depending on the case.
The list of the prohibited goods is produced in Annex 2
(b) The symbol "LIC" indicates that either importation or exportation of the related goods is restricted and
subject to a special license issued by a designated ministry or body.
The list of the restricted goods is produced in Annex 3
(c) The symbol "STR" indicates that goods are subject of a reduction of sales tax due to the deafferent
formula of calculating the amount of sales tax. For the goods falling in the subheadings marked with
symbol "STR", instead of the Customs value, the base for calculating the sales tax is the amount of duty.
The list of goods for which a reduction of sales tax is applicable is produced in Annex 4.
(d) The symbol "FREE" indicates the good are subject to a favorable tariff treatment due to their nature
and are exempted from the import or export duties. The symbol "-" (dash) appears in that case in
columns 4.

C. General rules applicable both to nomenclature and to duties
1. The assessment of the amount of ad valorem Customs duties will be made on the base of Customs value of
imported or exported goods. As provided in the Customs valuation related provisions, the base for
determination of the Customs value will be the transaction value of goods being imported or exported.
2. The assessment of the specific Customs duties will be made on the base the quantity measured on the unit
mentioned along with the specific rate.
3. The dutiable weight, in the case of goods chargeable by weight, and the weights by reference to which the
scope of certain headings or subheadings is defined, shall be taken to be:
(a) in the case of a reference to 'gross weight', the aggregate weight of goods and of all the packing
materials and packing containers;
(b) in the case of a reference to 'net weight' or simply to 'weight' without qualification, the weight of the
goods themselves without packing materials and packing containers of any kind.
4. Unless it is specified, the term weight means 'net weight'.