Somalie — Somali Customs Automated System (SOMCAS), Standard Operating Procedures
sur le processus des déclarations en douane, Annexe C « Customs Valuation »
(pages 29 à 31 du PDF) et extrait sur les Incoterms.
Source : https://revenuedirectorate.gov.so/sites/default/files/pdf/Standard%20Operating%20Procedures%20on%20the%20Process%20of%20Customs%20Declarations%20Through%20SOMCAS.pdf
Somalia Revenue Directorate / Somali Customs Department. Extrait automatique du
PDF officiel, non retouché.

--- Annexe C, « Customs Valuation » ---

Valuation according to the Customs Act 2020 and Customs Valuation Regulations 2023
Under the Customs Act 2020, the dutiable value of imported goods is determined by reference to the
goods' "normal price". The evidence of a "normal price" is usually an invoice issued under normal
commercial arms' length arrangements. These arrangements are aligned to some extent with the
principle of "transaction value" of imported goods set out in the WTO Valuation Agreement.
The importer is required to declare the transaction value of the goods when making the goods
declaration to Customs.
It is the responsibility of the Customs Officer to confirm the transaction value. To do this he/she
should examine all supporting documents, bearing in mind the known risk of undervaluation through
the use of false invoices or shipment documents. Physical examination of the goods may be necessary
to confirm the full description of the goods in order to aid confirmation of the transaction value.
If the Customs Officer doubts the transaction value declared by the importer, they may request further
information from the declarant. It is responsibility of the declarant to prove the declared value to the
satisfaction of Customs.
If the declarant fails to provide proof of the declared value, the Customs Valuation Regulations 2023
empowers Customs to apply Customs Reference Values (CRVs) when the "normal price" is not
available, or the supporting invoice/documents are not acceptable. In other words, either when a
supporting invoice is missing or when Customs is not satisfied with the content or authenticity of the
supporting invoice.

--- Incoterms et traitement du fret / de l'assurance (page 31) ---

Terms of Delivery (Incoterms) — FOB (Free on Board) / CIF (Cost, insurance, and freight) :
When the terms are FOB, the Commercial Invoice should be supported by Freight Invoices and
Insurance Certificates. Freight and Insurance are commonly undervalued.
When the terms are CIF, deduct approximate freight and insurance charges to check the unit value of
the goods (if not shown separately). The remaining FOB value may be suspiciously low.