Customs and Excise Act — Republique de Zambie
Texte publie par le Parlement : parliament.gov.zm
Extraits : CINQUIEME ANNEXE (s.85, s.88) clauses 2 et 3 (valeur en douane) ;
section 88 (assiette de l'accise a l'importation) ;
ADDITIONAL ZAMBIAN RULES, regle 2 (assiette du taux ad valorem, et regle de
departage des droits alternatifs).
Extraction pymupdf, texte non retouche.
========================================================================

--- CINQUIEME ANNEXE, clauses 1 a 3 ---
FIFTH SCHEDULE  
Section 85 and 88 
 
VALUATION OF GOODS FOR THE 
PURPOSE OF THE TARIFF  
 
1. (1) In this Schedule- 
 
"computed value" means the value determined in accordance with 
clause 7;  
 
"country of export" means  the country from which the goods are deemed to be 
shipped pursuant to this Act and the country from which any goods are exported; 
 
"deductive value" means the value determined in accordance with 
clause 6; 
 
 
 
 
 
"goods of the same class or kind" means imported goods that- 
(a) are within a group or range of imported goods produced by a particular 
industry or industry sector that includes identical goods or similar goods in 
relation to the goods being valued; and 
(b) for the purposes of- 
Interpretati
on   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
(i) Clause 6, were exported from any country; and 
(ii) Clause 7, were produced in and exported from the country in and from 
which the goods being valued were produced and exported: 
"identical goods" means imported goods that- 
(a) are the same in all respects, including physical characteristics, quality, and 
reputation, as the goods being valued, except for minor differences in 
appearance that do not affect the value of the goods;  
(b) are produced in the country in which the goods being valued were 
produced; and 
(c) are produced by or on behalf of the person who produced the goods being 
valued but does not include imported goods where engineering, development 
work, artwork, design work, plans, or sketches undertaken in Zambia were 
supplied, directly or indirectly, by the buyer of those imported goods free of 
charge or at a reduced cost for use in connection with the production and sale for 
export of those imported goods; 
 
"price paid or payable", in relation to any goods, means the aggregate of all 
amounts paid or payable by the buyer to or for the benefit of the seller in respect 
of the goods; 
 
"to produce" includes to grow, to manufacture, and to mine; 
 
"similar goods" means imported goods that- 
(a) closely resemble the goods being valued in respect of component 
materials and parts and characteristics and are functionally and commercially 
interchangeable with the goods being valued having regard to the quality and 
reputation of the goods and the goods being valued;  
(b) are produced in the country in which the goods being valued were 
produced; and 
(c) are produced by or on behalf of the person who produced the goods being 
 
valued but does not include imported goods where engineering, development 
work, artwork, design work, plans, or sketches undertaken in Zambia were 
supplied, directly or indirectly by the buyer of those goods imported free of 
charge or at a reduced cost for use in connection with the production and sale for 
export of those imported goods; 
 
''sufficient information" in respect of the determination of any amount, difference, 
or adjustment, means objective and quantifiable information that clearly 
establishes the accuracy of the amount, difference, or adjustment; and 
 
"transaction value" means the value determined in accordance with clauses 2 and 
3. 
 
(2) For the purposes of this Schedule, persons shall be deemed to be related only 
if- 
(a)   they are officers or directors of one another's business;  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
(b)   they are legally recognised partners in business;  
(c)   they are employer and employee;  
(d)   any person directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds 5 percent or 
more of the outstanding voting stock or shares of both of them;  
(e)   one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;  
(f )   both of them are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;  
(g)   they together directly or indirectly control a third person. or 
(h)   they are members of the same family. 
 
(3) For the purposes of this Schedule persons shall be deemed to be members  of 
the same family if- 
(a)   they are connected by blood relationship within the fourth degree of  
relationship;  
(b)   they are married to one another or if one is married to a person  who is 
connected within the fourth degree of relationship to the other; or 
(c)   one has been adopted as the child of the other or as a child of a person who is 
within the third degree of relationship to the other. 
(4) For the purposes of this Schedule, where there are no goods that were 
produced by or on behalf of the person who produced the goods being valued and 
that are otherwise identical goods or similar goods, goods that were produced by 
or on behalf of a different person and that are otherwise identical goods or similar 
goods shall be deemed to be identical goods or similar goods, as the case may be. 
 
(5) For the purposes of this Schedule, charges for interest under a financing 
arrangement entered into by the buyer and relating to the purchase of imported 
goods shall not be regarded as part of the customs value where- 
 
(a)  
the charges are distinguished from the price actually paid or payable 
for the goods;  
(b) such goods are actually sold at the price declared as the price actually paid 
or payable;  
(c) the buyer, if required, can demonstrate that- 
(i)  the financing arrangement was made in writing; and 
(ii) the claimed rate of interest does not exceed the level of such transaction  
prevailing in the country where, and at the time when, the finance was 
provided. 
(6)  For the purpose of this Schedule, the value of any goods imported under a 
hire or leasing contract shall be the total rental or lease charges paid or 
payable, as the case may be, and the other provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply with necessary modification. 
(As amended by Act No. 4 of 1999  and No. 3 of 2000) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
2. (1)  The customs value of imported goods shall be their transaction value, that 
is, the price paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to Zambia, 
adjusted in accordance with clause 3- 
(a) if there are no restrictions respecting the disposition or use of the goods by 
the buyer, other than restrictions that-- 
(i)  are imposed by law;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) do not substantially affect the value of the goods;  
 
(b) (a) if the sale of the goods or the price paid or payable for the goods is not 
subject to some condition or consideration in respect of which a value cannot be 
determined; 
 
(c) (b) where any part of the proceeds of any subsequent resale, disposal, or use of  
the goods by the buyer is to accrue, directly or indirectly, to the seller, the price 
paid or payable for the goods includes the value of that part of the proceeds or can 
be adjusted in accordance with clause 3; or 
(d) if the buyer and seller of the goods are not related at the time the goods are sold 
for export or, where the buyer and seller are related at that time,-- 
 
(i) their relationship did not influence the price paid or payable   for the goods; or 
 
(ii) the importer demonstrates that the transaction value of the goods meets the 
requirements set out in sub clause (2) of this clause. 
 
(2) In a sale between related persons, for the purpose of showing that the 
relationship did not influence the transaction value, the importer shall produce 
evidence that the transaction value of the goods being valued, taking into 
consideration any relevant factors including such factors and differences as may 
be prescribed, closely approximates the customs value of other goods exported at 
the time or substantially at the same time as the goods being valued, is- 
 
(a) the transaction value of identical goods or similar goods in respect of a sale of 
those goods for export to Zambia between a seller and buyer who are not related 
at the time of the sale; or 
 
(b) the deductive value of identical or similar goods determined in accordance 
with clause 6; or 
 
(c) the computed value of identical or similar goods determined in accordance 
with clause 7. 
 
(3) Where the Commissioner-General is of the opinion that the  relationship 
between the buyer and seller of any goods influenced the price paid or payable for 
the goods, the Commissioner-General shall inform the importer, in writing if so 
requested, of the grounds on which the Commissioner-General formed that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
opinion, and shall give the importer a reasonable opportunity to satisfy the 
Commissioner-General that the relationship did not influence the price. 
 
(4) Where sub clause (2)  applies, the importer shall, without limiting the 
generality of  that sub clause, provide the following information: 
 
(a)  the nature of the goods being valued; 
 
(b)  the nature of the industry that produces the goods being valued; 
 
(c)  the season in which the goods being valued are imported; 
 
(

--- section 88 ---
shall be converted- 
(a) in the case of goods in respect of which an entry shall be made, at 
the rate applying as at the date of importation or the date of the 
making of the first entry for those goods, whichever is the later date; 
(b) in the case of other goods, at the rate applying as at the date of the 
first assessment of  duty on those goods. 
(As amended by Act No. 4 of 1999) 
 
88.  The value for the purposes of assessing the amount of excise duty 
due on  goods imported into Zambia shall be the customs value 
determined in accordance with the Fifth Schedule to this Act and any 
customs duty payable on those goods. 
 
(As amended by Act No. 4 of 1999) 
88A.  The value for the purposes of assessing the amount of excise duty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency 
to be converted 
into Zambian 
currency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of 
excise duty due 
on importation 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
or surtax payable on goods manufactured in Zambia shall be determined 
in accordance with the Sixth Schedule to this Act.  
 
(As amended by Act No.4 of 1999) 
88B. The value for customs purposes of goods exported from Zambia 
shall be  the Free on Board value at the place of despatch or customs port 
of shipment. 
 
(As amended by Act No. 4 of 1999) 
Assess

--- ADDITIONAL ZAMBIAN RULES, regle 2 ---
the relative Section and 

 
 
 
 
Chapter Notes also apply, unless the context otherwise requires. 
(As amended by Act No.4 of 1999) 
ADDITIONAL ZAMBIAN RULES 
1.    The term ÔIn bulk,' where it appears in the nomenclature, means: 
(a) 
Loose without packing, in quantities of not less than five kilogrammes in weight or 
five litres in measure; or 
(b) 
That the net contents of any immediate container of goods weigh not less than five 
kilogrammes or measure not less than five litres. 
2.  (a)  Rates of duty shown as a percentage, denoted by the sy bol '%' are to be calculated as 
a percentage of the Value For Duty Purposes. 
(b)  Where the alternative rates of duty are specified, the rate which yields the greater 
amount of duty shall apply. 
3.    For the purpose of the interpretation and application of the tariff, reference shall be 
made to the "Explanatory Notes (EN) of the Harmonised Commodity Description and 
Coding System" as published and amended by the World Customs Organisation Council. 
4. A provision for parts of an article covers products solely or principally used as a part of 
the article but a provision for "parts" or "parts and accessories" shall not prevail over a 
specific provision for a part or accessory. 
(As amended by Act No. 3 of 2000) 
ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS 
AC 
alternating current 
kVar 
Kilovolt 
ASTM American Society for Testing Materials 
kW k